The Bull of Phalaris and the Singing Cicadas I would like to frame what is to come with two saturated images, reflect-ing eros moving down from the surface to the depth, and eros moving up from the depth to the surface.10 In these we encounter a mingling of mythic elements, aesthetic religion, political art, carnal love, and the carnival of the sacred. First: the story of the Bull of Phalaris as bringing into focus many of our themes: art, technē, political power, religious piety, anticipations of eros turannos and the erotics of the intimate universal. A version of the tale is told by Lucian. As a sacrifice to Apollo Phalaris the tyrant sent to the oracle at Delphi the statue of a magnificent bronze bull. 
In his communication with the priests at Delphi, Phalaris recounts how he was given the bull by Perilaus. Perilaus was an architect and sculptor and constructed the bull as a kind of torture machine. See Perilaus as con-tributing to Phalaris with his art: art outwardly beautiful and useless but instrumentally very politically useful for a tyrant. The artist is in the politi-cal business of serviceable disposability. A person could be put into the bronze bull and a fire lit beneath it, and as the heat spread and was com-municated through the contraption, the person imprisoned would “feel the heat”—and begin to scream. The fiendish part of the construction had 312—The Intimate Universal—Systematic Thoughts to do with the fact that reed pipes could be placed in the nostrils of the bull and they would transform the screams of the tortured prisoner into sweet music.11 The screams of the tortured are turned into “the sweetest possible music by the auloi, piping dolefully and lowing piteously.”12 We can look at the bronze bull as a thing of beauty; and that it was offered to the oracle shows some aura of the sacred haunting it. “A thing of beauty is a joy forever,” John Keats said, but when we look at the fuller communication here, the bull is not a univocal example of beauty beyond serviceable disposability. To the contrary, it is beauty that can be put to political use, and by the artist in the services of the tyrant. Eros turranos is then dominant rather than eros ouranios. Qua technical contraption, the work of art transmogrifies into exquisite music the excruciating pain of those being burned alive, and all this designed to delight the tyrant. The shrieks of mortal despair serve as sources of aesthetic pleasure, but those who hear the music do not hear the shrieks.
That this is a torture chamber to ease the work of the tyrant touches on a point. Torture itself touches on what is intimate to us—it touches vio-lently on the last idiocy of the soul by assault on the aesthetics of the soul, its body. Torture seeks the truth by violence to the passio essendi, by vio-lation of the intimacy of being. It seeks the place of the most vulnerable porosity. Torture can impel revelation, if not of the hell of the tortured person, surely of the hellish soul of the torturer. Are we then tempted to wonder: Does the art work then serve, on the one hand, to reveal hell and, on the other hand, to conceal hell? This is the perplexity the story poses for us: Is this what beauty is—music wrong from hell, concealing hell as it is, and making it look like a heaven? The lovely sounds that the pipes bring forth disguise the shrieks of the tormented. Is this beauty then: a delicate gloss on dis-mal darkness? Music: Counterfeit of the shrieking of the damned? Does the surface of beauty hide the horror of hell?13 We give ourselves up to the enchanting music. We give ourselves up to what Coleridge called “the willing suspension of disbelief.” But is it so that all we need to do is show the mechanism of the enchantment and the enchantment vanishes? We have seen something of that sort of art in our own time—the self-reflexive art where the artist delights in breaking the illusion of art, taking us backstage, as it were, showing us the trick by which the magic spell is sustained. The enchantment is no longer sustain-able because we know it is only a trick or a ruse or even a necessary illu-sion. Backstage of beauty we see the mechanisms of hell. Recall Nietzsche: 
The Erotics of the Intimate Universal 313 we need the “lies” of art to save us from the “truth.” We suspect some-thing of the old story: beauty is a seductress we must resist. We behold a beautiful woman but now know that silently, secretly, her liver, earlier the organ of divination, is cancerous. The organs of the body are hidden, and not just for protection. If they are exposed, they are not beautiful in the way of the outward body and they will die. The organs are profound— buried in the body. The beautiful body itself is superficial. This is very equivocal: truth may be a woman, as Nietzsche suggests, but woman is also Baubo. The self-reflexive mode seems profound and not superficial, but has it lost the wisdom of the aesthetic, and indeed the lightness of being, which is superficial out of profundity (to borrow an acute phrase from Nietzsche)? In one version of the story, Phalaris puts Perilaus himself into the bull. In a kind of self-reflexive gesture that redounds on the artist, he must be himself tortured in the instrument of torture he has created. 
Then his idiocy is assailed, his singular intimacy assaulted, and he is no longer exempt from the vileness of the counterfeit beauty he has created. 
Is the tyrant right to put the architect into the machine he has made? Is this the not-so-delicate irony of the tyrant: give the artist a dose of his own medicine, a sample of his own sickness?14 The question then: Is there quite a different sense in which the art-ist might turn hell into song—a redemptive sense? One is reminded of Orpheus and his music in Hades. There are different ways of being in the underworld. His music could bring tears even in the underworld, and melt hard hearts. Enchanting song reopens even in hell the primal poros-ity. This is another way of being in hell, and communicating a power that is more than hell.15 The same song might be sung in hatred or in love. 
Hatred may conceal love—for the lover is unable to confess his love and it comes out hatefully. Equally, love may disguise hatred—for the malignant soul more effectively works its malice when the victim thinks that before her is the face of love. The most effective enemies are those that come across as friends, but betrayal and treachery are still at hand. Intimate to the love is dangerous equivocity.
I come to the second story: the singing of the cicadas in Plato’s Phaedrus, a striking story, one beautiful and poignant. We find Socrates outside the city, as he almost never is. The trees won’t teach him anything as people will, he says (230d). For the most part he is illuminated by the conver-sation of humans, but here the space is other than the constructions of the city that reflect the human being back to itself.16 Socrates has already 314—The Intimate Universal—Systematic Thoughts given a first speech about eros in which love is reduced to use, or serviceable disposability: the beloved is for me to use or be used, perhaps even to be abused in being so used. Before this speech we also heard Phaedrus deliver a speech dealing with, one might say, consenting instrumental adults, motivated by rational self-interest, who are in control of themselves and always attentive to advantage, present and future (“not being overcome by passion” is part of that calculation, 233c). Eros uses the other accord-ing to the terms of serviceable disposability. Socrates covers his head in telling his first speech (Phaedrus, 237a), which abruptly ends when he says: “just as the wolf loves the lamb, so the lover adores his beloved” (241d). One might say: calculative eros, motivated by serviceable dispos-ability, is on the way to eros turannos; there is no wooing.17 These first two speeches are shameless speeches, impious speeches.18 There is a need for purgation and recantation. Then comes Socrates’s great speech in praise of divine mania—given by the gods for our greatest happiness (245 b–c). 
This is the sense of supreme usefulness beyond serviceable disposability, not instrumental as defined by its being for us alone. Quite the contrary, it is the porosity to the beyond of ourselves that allows reception of the offer of what is beyond our rational calculations of serviceable disposability.
It is after this second speech, spoken with uncovered head, that Socrates tells the story of the cicadas. The cicadas once were men before the birth of the Muses. When the Muses were born and music appeared, some of these men were so ravished with delight that they sang and sang, forgetting all food and drink, so in love with song that eventually they died. From them the cicadas arose, reborn but gifted by the Muses, and so overcome with the boon of music that they too seemed to forget to eat and drink. This is an image of the excess, of the too muchness, of the divine madness, such is the ecstasy: being sick with love. The story goes on to say: On death the cicadas go to the Muses. There they tell to the Muses of human beings, tell also of those who pass their lives in philosophy, and for whom the thought and the music of heaven are the sweetest.19 By comparison with the story of the Bull of Phalaris, here the origin of music is in the gift given by the Muses. Music is not the mask of hidden hell. There is an exposure and there is a passion, but both are taken into an ecstasy of love that exceeds the needs of life in food and drink. The love is consumed by something beyond these: something useless, but a sign of something more, something supremely useful for humans, a wor-thiness beyond serviceable disposability. And it is notable that Socrates The Erotics of the Intimate Universal 315 enjoins Phaedrus not to fall asleep, like the sheep do in the midday heat, but to stay awake and converse. The cicadas seem to look down on us and perhaps we will receive something of the gift that the gods bestowed on them (258e). There is an invitation to readiness in hearing the song of the cicadas. The lovers of song will die but like the cicadas they will be reborn, and endlessly sing, tireless and nurtured by something more than ordinary food or nourishment. Consumed by a love that is not a sickness unto death, in love with what the gods give as gifts, instead of the tyrannical eros and the vile uses of art, the singers watch over human beings for the gods. There is a measure higher than the human measure.
For reasons not easy to explain, there is something deeply moving about this story of the singing cicadas. Useless and passionate as it might seem to be, the song makes the philosopher porous to something that exceeds philosophy. Useless beauty and the passion of being carry the philosopher into a sacred space that the philosopher can grant but not determinately explain. We can grant it as granted but as such it exceeds anything we can grant ourselves. With such beauty we find ourselves graced.20 The cicadas become seers and one is reminded again of what King Lear became in his madness: one of “God’s spies.” This seeing is not the work of espionage. Lear as king was mad with eros turannos; now he is touched by a madness posthumous to that madness. Lear speaks of those spies as blessing and forgiving, as singing and praying and laughing “as gilded butterflies,”21 as taking upon themselves “the mystery of things, / As if we were God’s spies; and we’ll wear out, / In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones / That ebb and flow by the moon” (King Lear, 5.3.9). One might say: there is a commission to behold beyond use—a useless beholding, but one in which the passion of being becomes com-passion. We sing in the sublunary world but the source of the song comes over us from above the moon.

pp.311-315 