We  can  compare  the  movement  of  rebirth  to  the  cyclical  operation  of  departure,  arrival  and  return.  If  we look at the movement of rebirth, it is a transforma-tion  which  brings  about  a  new  “default”.  As  soon  as  the transformation is complete we have attained a new default. This new default in some ways will be identical 
departure, arrIval, return17
to our old default. If we do not take care, something is lost, and everything stays the same. We are back to our all-to-familiar state. How do we keep going? How do we dislodge ourselves from business as usual? We must cre-ate strategies for departure, we need machines geared towards the unknown. We do not as human beings ever “arrive”  in  a  finality,  we  circumambulate.  After  arrival  follows the resolution of return, and it is this that it lies at the heart of becoming.The  original  title  of  this  text  was  Architectures  of  Mobility,  To  me  this  referred  to  a  class  of  motifs  which  embody the potential for movement. Vessels which ac-tivate our desire flows. These motifs become more pow-erful  when  we  are  faced  with  immobilities,  alienation,  the rigidification of habit or a melancholic ennui. But it is not simply the motifs of travel that I was concerned with, and I was merging two distinct ideas under one banner. It  for  me  began  to  signify  more  the  situation  which  al-lows though to take flight beyond its subjective limits. The  situation  which  embraces  the  unknown.  It  is  the  machine which can be plunged into chaos and does not drown.

p16-17 Departure Arrival Return