---
aliases:
  - divine idiocy
  - idiocy
---
". This excess of the infinite reserve of the origin, just as completely at home with itself, would be the infinite serenity of goodness. There would be no ripple of disturbance in its inner life, for even its immanent otherness is also absolute goodness, and hence the infinite serenity would be a radiance of goodness, at once, and paradoxically for us, if one could say it, both centripetal and centrifugal. It is not that the turbulences, indeed evils of finitude are nothing or irrelevant to it; rather, the embrace of the infinite serenity is ready to take the disturbance to itself and restore it to the peace of goodness." God and the Between p.160

"Nothing more? Infinite simplicity, as in itself the resolving of oppositions, as prior to oppositions arising, and superior to oppositions having arisen, though no opposition does arise in the divine life itself. (Hegel and others like him make a serious mistake here, in thinking of the divine life in terms of a self-becoming through immanent opposition.) Inexhaustible richness, and in that sense a kind of infinite complexity. But also: a kind of infinite poverty, as the pure porosity of agapeic love, and the compassion of being that is pure readiness, even to the point of kenotically making (a) way for what it brings to be as other to itself." p.161

"The intimate process of divine “self-mediation” would be the eternal arising of infinitely intricated surplus, communicating itself in a pure porosity that is absolutely itself in not insisting on itself, loving its own otherness immanent to its intermediation, enjoying its goodness in an eternal peace that is the absolutely limpid simplicity of its being."

"Nothing is added to anything in that sense – except that, astoundingly, the being of the beneficiaries comes into their own being. They are brought into their proper good; just as, equally, the being true of the giver is in its bringing all beings into their own proper good. Example from base in the between: if I do another good, is this not at bottom what I am doing: bringing the loved other into the neighborhood of their own good? Agapeic creation would be a bringing of beings into their proper truth and good, by bringing their truth and good into being."