The Great Doubt comes to light from the ground of our existence
only when we press our doubts (What am I? Why do I exist?) to their
limits as conscious acts of the doubting self. The Great Doubt represents not only the apex of the doubting self but also the point of its
"passing away" and ceasing to be "self. " It is like the bean whose seed
and shell break apart as it ripens: the shell is the tiny ego, and the seed
the infinity of the Great Doubt that encompasses the whole world. It is
the moment at which self is at the same time the nothingness of self, the
moment that is the "locus" of nothingness where conversion beyond the
Great Doubt takes place. For the Great Doubt always emerges as the
opening up of the locus of nothingness as the field of conversion from
the Great Doubt itself. This is why it is "Great."
This is also why it can be called the "Great Death." There are
numerous Zen sayings referring to that conversion in such terms, for
example: "In the Great Death heaven and earth become new," and
"Beneath the Great Death, the Great Enlightenment. " As in the case of
doubt, this enlightenment must be an enlightenment of the self, but at
the same time it must signal a "dropping off" of the mode of being in
which "self" is seen as agent. It is something that presents itself as real
from the one ground of the self and all things. It is the true reality of the
self and all things, in which everything is present just as it is, in its
suchness. 

p.21

The standpoint of sunyata is another thing altogether. It is not a standpoint of simply negative negativity, nor is it an essentially transitional standpoint. It is the standpoint at which absolute negation is at the same time, in the sense explained above, a Great Affirmation. It is not a standpoint that only states that the self and things are empty. If this were so, it would be no different from the way that nihility opens up at the ground of things and the self. The foundations of the standpoint of sunyata lie elsewhere: **not that the self is empty, but that emptiness is the self; not that things are empty, but that emptiness is things.** Once this conversion has taken place, we are able to pass beyond the standpoint on which nihility is seen as the far side of existence. Only then does the standpoint appear at which we can maintain not merely a far side that is beyond us, but a far side that we have arrived at. Only on this standpoint do we really transcend the standpoint still hidden behind the field of nihility, namely of a near side looking out at a far side. This "arrival at the far side"[^4] is the realization of the far side. As a standpoint assumed at the far side itself, it is, of course, an absolute conversion from the mere near side . But it is also an absolute conversion from a near side looking out at a far side beyond. The arrival at the far side is nothing less than an absolute near side.

p.138 

For us as human beings, to revert to that field entails at one and the same time an elemental affirmation of the existence of all things (the world) and an elemental affirmation of our own existence. The field of sunyata is nothing other than the field of the Great Affirmation.

p.131

In that sense, emptiness might be called the field of "be-ification" (lchtung) in contrast to nihility which is the field of "nullification" (Nichtung). To speak in Nietzschean ternts, this field of be-ification is the field of the Great Affirmation, where we can say Yes to all things.

p.124

The authentic awareness of subjectivity that Eckhart sets up as an absolute negation-sive-affirmation, as absolute death-sive-life, figures in contemporary existentialism without passing through absolute negation. Nihility appears at the ground of self-being and renders it ecstatic, but this ecstasy is not yet the absolute negation of being, and thus does not open up to absolute nothingness.

"The Personal and Impersonal" p.65

In contrast Nietzsche, as early as in The Birth of Tragedy, took up a position well beyond the standpoint of the ego. In his later thought the standpoint of an absolute negation-sive-affirmation is fairly clear. But this absolute affirmation, or Ja-sagen, comes about in things like "life" and the "Will to Power," so that it is not sufficiently clear in his case precisely to what extent the recovery of such a standpoint includes the sense of a subjective awakening wherein the self truly becomes the self.

"The Personal and Impersonal" p.65-66

As we have just been saying, subjective existence is realized in ecstasy, that is, in a mode of being wherein the self is in itself at the point that it has stepped over itself. If we take this a stage further, however, this sense of ecstasy turns out to be inadequate. It leaves out the more profound and comprehensive standpoint of absolute negation-sive-affirmation spoken of earlier. Ecstasy represents an orientation from self to the ground of self, from God to the ground of God-from being to nothingness. Negation-sive-affirmation represents an orientation from nothingness to being. The difference in orientation points to a reversal of standpoints. (It is not without good reason that Heidegger made an about-face from his earlier course to rethink his stance on ekstasis in an orientation proceeding from the ground.) Up to now I have, for the most part, followed the course of ecstasy in pursuing the questions of subjectivity and of the personal and the impersonal . If these issues are to be delved into more deeply, the kind of reversal we have just referred to will be necessary .

p.68

In this kind of existential conversion, the self does not cease being a personal being. What is left behind is only the person-centered mode of grasping person, that is, the mode of being wherein the person is caught up in itself. In that very conversion the personal mode of being becomes more real, draws closer to the self, and appears in its true suchness. When person-centered self-prehension is broken down and nothingness is really actualized in the self, personal existence also comes really and truly to actualization in the self. This is what is meant by absolute negation-sive-affirmation, and it is here that some "thing" called personality is constituted in unison with absolute nothingness. Without a nothingness that is living and a conversion that is existential, this would make no sense.

p.71

Insofar as the field of nothingness is completely one with personality and consciousness, the whole of this oneness is present within personality and consciousness. Conversely, insofar as personality and consciousness can be what they are only in oneness with absolute nothingness, the same complete oneness stands ecstatically outside of personality and consciousness. The absolute within and absolute without are here one and the same. What renders this possible is that we are arrived at the standpoint of absolute nothingness, that is of absolute nothingness-sive-being, being-sive-nothingness. Insofar as personal being with its heart and mind is completely one with absolute seIthood, it is utterly real; insofar as personal being is completely apart from absolute selfhood, it is utterly illusory and shadowlike. For this reason the supremely unreal heart and mind of the shadowy man, although they originate from moment to moment as things completely temporary and completely in the world of time, at the same time and on every occasion, in their very temporality they stand ecstatically outside of time. They are altogether "eternal" in their temporality. Coming into being and passing away at each fleeting moment as they do, the heart and mind of the shadowy man are on every occasion "from long ago mysteriously wondrous."

p.74

The absolute seltbood that is described in terms of "neither I nor other" is the self of man into which "skin and bones were put together," his actual conscious and personal existence with its living activities. But at the same time, in the very midst of those activities, it is ever ecstatic, ever "laying itself down in the Yellow Springs." From one moment to the next of human activity, it is absolutely death-sive-life, Iife-sivedeath; absolutely being-sive-nothingness, nothingness-sive-being. Similarl y, Eckhart says that the soul finds its spring of eternal life incessantly gushing up out of itself in the desert of godhead: in the nothingness that lies beyond even the being of God, the nothingness that is the field of the absolute death of the soul. 14

p.75

It was remarked earlier that the real Form of all things, including man, comes to be a "double exposure" oflife and death. All living things can be seen under the Form of death without thereby being separated from their proper Form of life. The real appearance of these things must be seen at ground to rest on the basis of absolute being-sive-nothingness, nothingness-sive-being, or of the absolute non-duality of life and death as we have just described it. This seems to me the only possible starting point for pursuing reflection on the problem of science and religion.

p.76 (conclusion)

The question will no doubt arise as to whether this is possible, and if so, how. What sort of mode of being do we have in mind when we say that a thing is only on its home-ground when it is in emptiness? Or, to put it the other way around, what do we mean by "in emptiness" when we say that things are a reality only in emptiness? When we say, "form is emptiness, emptiness is form," what is the mode of being of "form" (existing things)? And what is the significance of "emptiness"? Furthermore, if we say that things are "really" and "in their such ness" on their own home-ground and cut off from all representation and conceptualization-in short, that things are themselves-this cannot but imply directly that our self-nature opens up on the absolute near side and as an absolute near side, that there is an awareness of self-nature. But how is this possible? This problem appears, for example, in the famous passage from the opening of the "Genjokoan" chapter of Dogen's Shorogenz/): To practice and confinn all things by conveying one's self to them, is illusion: for all things (dhannas) to advance forward and practice and confinn the self, is enlightenment. And elsewhere in the same work: To learn the Buddha Way is to learn one's self. To learn one's self is to forget one's self. To forget one's self is to be confinned by all things (dharmas). To be confirmed \08 NIHILITY AND SUNVATA by all dharmas is to effect the dropping off of one's own body-and-mind and the mind-and-body of others as well. 2 What mode of being renders it possible for all things to come forth and practice and confirm the self, or for the self to be confirmed by all things? Why should this be at once a dropping off of the booy and mind of one's own self and a dropping off of the body and mind of other selves? Two passages from the MuchU mondo ("Questions and Answers in a Dream") of Muso Kokushi offer a further example: Hills and rivers, the earth, plants and trees, tiles and stones, all of these are the self's own original part. It is not that the field of that original part lies in body-and-mind, or that it lies outside body-and-mind, or that body-and-mind are precisely the place of the original part, or that the original part is sentient or non-sentient, or that it is the wisdom of Buddhas and saints. Out of the realm of the original part have arisen all things: from the wisdom of Buddhas and saints to the body-and-mind of every sentient being, and all lands and worlds. To what does this "original part of the self" point? What does it mean that hills and rivers, the earth, plants and trees, tiles and stones, all constitute the original part of the self, that they have all arisen out of the realm of that original part?

"Nihility and Sunyata" pp.107-108

Now the same can be said with regard to the self that was spoken of as "confirmed by all things" in that mode of being, namely, the self that is not a self. The mode of being of the self that I have in mind in saying that emptiness is self, or that the self is not self because it is self, can also be expressed as what the ancients called "emptiness samadhi" or the "samadhi of non-mind Form." Samadhi is not simply a psychological concept but an ontological one. The point at which the non-objective mode of being of things as they are in themselves takes hold of its ground lies at the home-ground of our self ("in hand" and "underfoot"). In its own home-ground, the being of the self is essentially a sort of samadhi . No matter how dispersed the conscious self be, its self as it is in itself is ever in samadhi. Indeed, when we look back at it again from its home-ground, that dispersed mode of being, such as it is, is in samadhi. I have called this nonobjective mode of being of things as they are in themselves-namely, the mode of being wherein things rest in the complete uniqueness of what they themselves are-a "middle"; I cited the saying, "If you try to explain something by comparing it with something else, you fail to hit the middle." If we grant that the field of sunyata, on which the possibility of the existence of the selfness of things takes hold of its ground, opens for us only when we return to our own home-ground, these words would apply in their most original sense to our own self in itself. Our self in itself is most elementally "middle." It resists all explanation because it is a being in unison with emptiness; because it is a being united with emptiness in a self-awareness according to which emptiness is self; and because, by virtue of that 166 THE STANDPOINT SiiNYATA self-awareness, which is nearer to the elemental than anything else, it precedes the world and all things. Every human being in its selfness contains the field of that force by virtue of which the selfness of all things are gathered into one as a world. This field contains a roothold for the possibility of all things that become manifest in the world. And yet each human being, as such, is but one illusory thing in the world among others.

"The Standpoint of Sunyata" pp.165-166

When we say that our self in itself is most elementally "middle," we are not thinking in terms of the "middle" that Aristotle, for instance, spoke of as the "mean" between too much and too little. Nor are we thinking of the role of go-between that Hegel attributed to reason as a "mediation" between contradictories. Whereas these are both "middies" projected on the field of reason, the "middle" seen as a mode of being on the field of emptiness cannot be projected on any other field whatsoever. It is immediately present-and immediately realized as such-at the point that we ourselves actually are. It is "at hand" for us and "underfoot." Just as no one else can see for us or hear for us, so too none of our actions can be performed by proxy. All actions imply, as it were, an absolute immediacy. And it is there that what we are calling the "middle" appears. N ow this insistence that we do not hit the "middle" of the self when we come at it through some other thing may seem to contradict the words cited earlier about hills and rivers, grass and trees, and so on being the self's original part. But this difficulty stems from the fact that hills and rivers, grass and trees, as well as the self itself, are being represented in a merely objective manner. On the field of the opposition between the subjective and the objective, the subject is still represented in a self-conscious manner such that it can never be objectified. But at a deeper level we find a relationship in which all things are in our home-ground and we ourselves are in the home-ground of all things. What we have in mind here is not a unification of subject and object, but what we called before a circuminsessional relationship. Therefore, even though we speak of hills and rivers as the self's original part, hills and rivers are here hills and rivers in not being hills and rivers, just as the self is the self in not being the self. And yet it is only here that hills and rivers are real hills and rivers in their suchness, only here that the self is the real self in its suchness. It is on this field that our self is the "self-presentation" of the most elemental "middle. "

"The Standpoint of Sunyata" p.166

"As noted in the previous pages, this Existenz of the dropped off body-and-mind denotes "the solitary one laid bare amidst the myriad phenomena" and is the truth (Alithea) of that Existenz unveiling itself absolutely. In bearing witness to this solitary one laid bare, each and every phenomenon is by far more itself than it is on its own homeground. We can say that in the beginning where the world worlds, the world is more truly itself than it is in the world itself. That "all dharmas advance forward and practice and confirm the self" means that all dharmas return to a point where they are far more able to be "truth" than when they are in and by themselves, to the absolute truth, to what is unveiled in its full grandeur, solitary amidst the myriad of things."

"Sunyata and Time" p.199