#transcendence #self 
It is true that the radical exit from the self is the goal of mysticism. In however much the self is stable te begin with, however much it is seperated from the world, at odds with the object (thrown against) and thus also at odds with its own subjectivity, thrown under, in a tenuous state in which the I cannot be overcome, nullified, transcended, as it always remains in opposition with the things it imagines itself distinguished from. 

I was seeking an escape from the self through plenitude and intensities that had the capacity to overthrow me. I wanted a total annihalation, possession or otherwise ecstasy, perhaps a return to a primal state, an apokatastasis, a return to the godhead, and a complete breaking down of the veil seperating me from the ineffable spheres which would sing to me the mysteries of the world, even celebrate my reunion with them as I reach a final realization that would bring not just me but the entire reality and cosmos in to complete and total reunification. In other words, I would have finished the game of reality. This quest, although I have often gone to the limit, to the breaking point of being, did not bring me far. Whatever obsession I had was not fruitful, and whatever metaphors and charged images it left me with have not been too useful artistically, as all symbolic meaning has left any semblance of relation to the way an audience would understand it. And whatfor? Transcendence is not in the forefront of peoples imagination. And yet the crisis of meaning we are in can be an insertion point in which my own crisis is part and parcel of. A self overcoming that would raise itself up in union with the collective voices and thought of mankind, which I am in cybernetic relation with, and without which I would not even have a capacity to have a self. The self that is in relation with others. The self that emerges from the world, is of the world and in the world, and in a very real sense is the world and wants to give voice to the world. The role of the other is key here. The world is my big Other,