# Voice Note

*Transcribed: 2025-10-10 10:37*

I only use reason as an anesthetic, page 36, as an scandal, page 36. The scandal of reality is connected to the idiocy, the sheer that it is of ambiguity. The scandal highlights the flip side of the miracle. It contains its controversial, secretive, difficult to reconcile truly. Reality as happening is astonishing and excessive, hence the designation as scandal. I too must have turned down a death and alley, just like the others, page 36. The author in Breath of Life seems to manage an edit Angela. I control her as much as I can, deleting her merely foolish comments, page 39. This positions them in an plurivocal relationship with autonomy dispersed.

A chaotic Angela is elated by the author, allowed to come in existence on her old terms, but relational confined to a post-hoc pass of the author in a different modality. Quote, traveling through the book while keeping Angela company is tricky. End quote, page 39. Quote, author, I'd like to cure her of herself, but her sickness is stronger than my powers. End quote, page 42. Quote, from now I want more than understanding, I want super understanding, dada dada. I want to search the most intimate secret of whatever exists, dada dada. End quote, page 42. It seems like hubris, but super understanding and reaching secrets do not imply that the secret is unlocked, maybe only intimately acknowledged. 

Being as threat and gift.

Our existential choices relating to our survival can be triggering us in the same way that our ultimate concerns do. Namely, our ultimate concern of our being. The state of our being is an existential threat as well as a gift. Our survival and our ultimate concerns press on the same nerve. It seems logical our drive for survival becomes exacted in our drive for self-determination. Our hypertrophied conatus seems to be rooted in the same mechanisms that stimulate our survival, namely, stress and other bodily feedback. It can be compared to a trauma victim whose nervous system cannot turn off and is always in a state of threat. Since the overall structure of the brain has developed sequentially through time, we become victims of the primal structures in place for millions of years.

